Introduction
============


This folder contains several implementations of Chen-Wang-Sherman's
model of insulin secretion based on kinetic modeling of granule
exocytosis as described by [1]. The goal of all implementations is to
reproduce the paper's Figures 2 and 4.

Where allowed by the underlying language, the models have been
decomposed hierarchically in the following components:

| Component | Description                                          |
|-----------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Membrane  | A square voltage source                              |
| Calcium   | Calcium dynamics, with two state variables (Cmd, Ci) |
| Granules  | The kinetic chain of granule compartments            |
| ISR       | "Instantaneous" (2-min delayed) secretion delta      |


Summary of the model
-------------

The model includes: a membrane; two types of inward Ca++ voltage-gated
channels (L- and R-type); two corresponding compartments for calcium
(microdomain and cytosol, respectively, Figure a below);
insulin-carrying vesicles, arranged as a chain of states (from
resupply to releasing, Figure b).

*	Membrane depolarization is modeled as an input function V(t); 
*	V influences the fraction of open L- and R- channels through the sigmoid function minf(V);
*	Ions flow through L-type channels into Cmd and through R-type channels into Ci (Ref. 1, Figure 1 and Figure a, left);
*	Ci leaks through the currents SERCA, PMCA, NCX and leak (eq. (6) and Figure a, right);
*	Ci gates priming (r2) and resupply (r3) rates for pre-docked granules;
*	Cmd gates binding and fusion.

The equations for Cmd, Ci are a nonlinear 2-ODE system coupled to the
membrane depolarization (glucose) input. Granule compartments N<…> are
a linear 10-ODE system with time-varying coefficients. Secretion is a
simple integral; ISR is the secretion in the last 2 min (per min). The
original paper used a least-squares approach to fit the following
parameters: *gL, B, k1, k-1, r1, r-1, r20, r-2, r30, r-3, u1, u2, u3,
Kp,* plus the steady state (used as initial values).


Interface
---------

Direction | Variable | Description
----|-----|--------
Input| *V(t)* | 	membrane depolarization. Square wave between -70 and -20 mV with 6 min down and 6 min up to reproduce Figure 4, left; steady high for Figure 4, right. Other protocols are also used.
Output | *ISR* |	“Instantaneous” insulin secretion in the last 2 min (per minute). The model predicts (and parameters were fitted to reproduce) this quantity.



Implementation remarks
----------------------

Each of the implementations is a refactoring of the original XPP code
(found in Ref. 2 above). Modular language constructs have been used
where possible to split the model into separate calcium and vesicle
components for readability.  Variables, parameters and units have been
kept the same as the original code. Resupply rates $r_1$ and $r_2$ are
affected by two different parameters, called `Kp` and `Kp2` in the code,
with the same value; the equations use a single symbol $K_p$. Intervals
given for variables and parameters reflect the ones used to reproduce
paper’s Figure 4.



Model and data source
-----------

The model and data have been derived from publications and the XPP
implementation provided as supplementary material (Refs. 1-2).



Author
------

Codes except the XPP-AUT original are by T. Giorgino, 24-8-2012,
toni.giorgino@isib.cnr.it .





Contents of the subdirectories:
============

## xpp-aut-original-commented

Original XPP-AUT implementation straight out from ref. [2], with added
comments.


## conversion-matlab/ 

Matlab and Octave implementation.  Use either `ChenModel_run_matlab.m`
or `ChenModel_run_octave.m` depending on the software you are
using. The other files are shared.

Tested in Matlab R2012a and Octave 3.6.2.


## conversion-simulink/

Simulink implementation. Care has been used to allow 
for native code generation. Tested in R2012a.

File | Description
-----|----
chen_init.m		|	Matlab file containing the model's constants. Evaluate this first.
chen_r2.mdl   		| Simulink model
chen_r2_html.zip  	| HTML representation of the model
functions.txt		| Readable content of the FCN blocks



## conversion-modelica/

Modelica implementation. Tested on OpenModelica.  Both code-only
(`HenquinPools_r8.mo`) and an OpenModelica notebook are provided.


## conversion-antimony-sbml/

Antimony and SBML implementations produced by Lucien Smith's
QTAntimony (tested with QTAntimony 2.3 beta).

File | Description 
-----|---------
	4_henquin-pools-toni_r5.ant	| Antimony implementation
	4_henquin-pools-toni_r5.sbml	| Flattened SBML generated by QTAntimony
	NOTES.txt 			| Implementation and compatibility remarks

From Antimony, these models are automatically generated:

* Flat SBML (tested in COPASI 4.8, www.copasi.org, and RoadRunner/SBW Simulation Tool v1.4.4424.32048, sbw.sourceforge.net). See enclosed NOTES.txt file for details.

* Modular SBML, according to the sbml-comp extension.



## conversion-madonna/

Berkeley Madonna implementation (copy and paste the code in
`ChenModel.bm.txt` in the program's Equations panel). Tested with
Madonna v. 9.0.74, JEngine 1.8, JRE 1.6.0 .


References
==========

1. Chen Y, Wang S, Sherman A. Identifying the Targets of the
   Amplifying Pathway for Insulin Secretion in Pancreatic β-Cells by
   Kinetic Modeling of Granule Exocytosis. Biophysical Journal. 2008
   Set 1;95(5):2226–41

2. Supplementary material for the above (online) “Beta Cell Exocytosis
   Model”,
   http://mrb.niddk.nih.gov/sherman/gallery/beta/Vesicle/henquin-pools.ode


