Antimony conversion of Yi-der Chen et al, Identifying the Targets of
the Amplifying Pathway for Insulin Secretion in Pancreatic b-Cells by
Kinetic Modeling of Granule Exocytosis, Biophysical Journal, Volume
95, 2226-2241, doi:10.1529/biophysj.107.124990, based on the original
XPP implementation available at
http://lbm.niddk.nih.gov/sherman/gallery/beta/Vesicle/*

Author of the conversion: 
Toni Giorgino, ISIB, National Research Council of Italy
toni.giorgino@isib.cnr.it  mer 11 lug 2012, 18.12.55, CEST

An extensively-commented version is also available.

This file should be processed through Antimony
(http://antimony.sourceforge.net/) to generate SBML files. You
probably want to select the "Flatten" option (otherwise you need a
comp-sbml compliant engine).  

Validation: You can integrate the resulting "Secretion.xml" SBML file
(which contains the encapsulated Calcium and SquareSource models). The
secretion curves (SE) reproduce the paper's SE.  Tested with COPASI 4.8
(www.copasi.org) and RoadRunner/SBW Simulation Tool v1.4.4424.32048
(sbw.sourceforge.net).

Curves in Figure 2 are obtained after subtracting a 2-minutes-delayed
version. This can be approximated with the "ISR.xml" model in
RoadRunner, but not in COPASI, which lacks both events and delay.

Note that both this implementation (and the original XPP) do not
faithfully reproduce the calcium dynamics part of Figure 2. In
particular, Jncx is negative at steady state, and the transitions in
Figure 2 are much steeper.


----


Finding a software to integrate these SBML models is tricky.


Tested software:
 - Simbiology (Matlab 2009b)
   * only supports SBML L2V1 (no functions)
   * can use matlab functions, but they are not SBML
   * Antimony should export L2V1, but does not respect the 
     assigment order mandated by the spec.
   * abandoned because of the above problems
 - RoadRunner (part of Systems Biology Workbench): 
   * does not support the "rem()" MathML function
   * ignores the "delay()" function
   * ignores "rateRule" elements (workaround: use kineticLaw, i.e. 
     "x'=" becomes "->x;" in Antimony)
   * SE(t) works
   * ISR(t) works
 - COPASI
   * does not support the "rem()" MathML function
   * ignores the "delay()" function
   * SE(t) works
   * does not support (otherwise valid) simultaneous events, and ignores
     priorities. The crude 2'-ISR approximation does not work.
 - SBMLsimulator 1.0, http://www.cogsys.cs.uni-tuebingen.de/
   		      /software/SBMLsimulator/downloads/index.html
   * Works (not tested without workarounds)



All software:
 - Pay attention to discontinuities and singularities. For example,
   x/abs(x) will crash integration... on occasions.
 - Abrupt discontinuities may be missed. See heavx(). Prefer events.


QtAntimony v 2.1 beta can't convert the Secretion model in CellML.


More integrators to test (from Bergmann's "Implementing SBML Events"
presentation): 
	       RoadRunner
	       PySCeS
	       MathSBML
	       iBioSim
	       ByoDyn
	       SBML ODE Solver
